Honorable Minister, director General, Dr.
Bramley and everybody else, thank you
for making yourself available this morning.
We have you in here for 30 minutes.
I will allow you to make some opening remarks,
and then we will open it up to your members
for questions. Got it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, yeah,
I will just make a couple of brief comments.
Um, as Associate Minister of Health,
my focus this year has been on delivering practical
improvements across my areas of responsibility,
which include aged care, the development
of a modern regulatory framework for medicines
and medical devices, um, maternal
and women's health, emergency road and air services,
and our smoke-free goal.
Um, but what I want to talk about initially this morning is
just the aged care, um, program of work.
And I'd like to first of all thank the committee
for the work you did in this space
and the production of the report.
Um, obviously there'll be a formal response, um, to
that report, but in, in summary, you have, um,
covered some key areas
and the recommendations are in line with many of the things
that we've been talking about, that I've heard about,
and, um, compliments the direction of travel.
We definitely need more flexibility in the system so
that it provides the help people need.
We need to ensure that the community
and in-home care services are set up the right way so
that people can stay well at home as long
as they can and want to.
And, um, that's the right option.
We need more aged care beds. Absolutely.
We need more respite
and increased capacity to provide specialist dementia,
psychogeriatric, and palliative care,
and for the sector to be funded to provide these services
and invest in building more.
And we need better pathways out
of hospital for older people.
And from what I've seen, that starts
with getting the admission process right
and having upfront specialist advice considering the
individual patient's needs from the outset.
In short, consistent with your report, our system
for aged care needs to be one
where people can access services they need more easily
and transition between these services in a way
that improves health, um, outcomes and quality of life.
These are the issues for the Aged
Care Ministerial Advisory Group.
We'll be working through next year
with this committee's report, part of their consideration.
So thank you, Mr. Chair, and have each take questions.
Thank you, minister Dr. Vel.
Thank you, minister.
Um, and as you noted, the committee's taken a lot of time
to go into the issues around aged care.
You've mentioned the, um, issue of discharge of, um,
elderly people from hospital into aged care.
Can you please, is help us prioritize the top three
high impact actions that can be taken, uh, that,
that you are taking to, uh, uh, speed discharge out
of hospital for people to, to aged care?
I, I think there, there is, um, in terms of actions,
I think there is already actions in place
and we've got some very good programs of work that exist as,
as you'll be aware, um, hospital has a an excellent program
around the admission for through ed.
Um, the Wellington Hospital has an excellent program
around the surgical supporting the surgical unit.
So those are, those are the, um,
priorities I think is the geriatrician, um, in integration
with that process, I think is really important.
The, the, the, you know, actions in terms
of differentiating from BAU around what, what is the, um,
the Ministry and Health New Zealand's program work
around workforce, et cetera.
Those are all the challenges that,
that they will be responding to.
But what we are focused on is, is looking at those, um,
models of excellence that we know exist
and how we can expand those opportunities.
Um, Auckland Hospital also has an excellent program
involving the geriatricians social workers.
Um, and what we've seen is it does produce
excellent results in terms of lowering readmission as well
as shortening hospital stays.
And that's so, so therefore we know those models exist and
therefore it's expanding on that.
Um, having identified them,
do you currently have a program to expand them
that is funded across the country,
or is that under development at the moment
That that is under development?
So this is, um, you know, the,
the individual hospitals working through
what is achievable within their budgets and their processes.
But, um, again, we, we will support those initiatives
as part of this, um, aged care review. Do,
Uh, this is a big issue.
The committee's heard from many submitters on it and,
and when we wrote our report, do you
or your officials who are with you today have a sense
of the resource required to make progress against this,
um, this issue?
We haven't, we haven't got any numbers that I'm aware of.
I'm not sure if they, from an official perspective,
this isn't, um, a, a a separate piece of work
that's securing that this is a priority across all the
sectors because aged care is a, um,
a big consumer of services.
Um, but we have seen significant funding uplift into this,
um, program at work, particularly in the age care sector
Also as resource. Could
you, could you explain the funding please?
So this is for the Aged Care, um, funding uplifts that
To the understood sector.
Alright. And, uh,
you mentioned in your opening re remarks a
ministerial advisory group.
What are you hoping to get out of that group?
So the group, the objective is to have it stood up
by January, um,
to report back no later than the middle of the year.
We, we are expecting it to report back in May.
We've given a very tight timeline, um,
and this is the opportunity to actually look at, you know,
a lot of the recommendations
that have come from your report.
But what we know is that, you know, we have a high demand
of aged care beds,
but the system isn't sustainable as it sits at the moment.
We know that the contracting model isn't
fit for purpose any further.
It's been around for a long time.
So it's a developing system, um, that supports, um,
in-home community care, um, transition
through from hospital, um, aged care
because it's about balancing, you know,
decreasing the demand for aged care beds, as well
as increasing the supply of those beds has kind of got
to work complementary to each other.
So the program of work is, is that system system design
that we're trying to achieve in this space. Mr. One more?
Yeah, thank you. And, um, uh, that sounds very, very, uh,
technical and I'm sure you'll identify good people
to assist you with that technical task.
What should the public expect out of that piece of work?
I think the, the public should, um, ex expect a,
a clearer system design that, I mean, one of the things
that you will have heard a lot through the select committee
is that's lots of complexity around how to access services,
but fundamentally, people want to be able to stay at home
as long as possible.
And I think that's what we should be delivering as a system,
is the opportunity to be supported to live at home as long
as possible, um,
and be able to transition, you know, out of hospital better.
And that's where those, those palliative rehabilitative care
programs would, would complement that.
Thank you Ra, Larry.
Oh, thank you Minister. You've talked about the importance
of keeping people at home,
which is something I think we can all agree on.
In Australia, it was recognized that a critical part of
that workforce or the allied workforce
and, uh, they were having to import workers from overseas
to avoid that there was an uplift of 28.5%
by the Fair Work Commission
for a largely feminized workforce over the last three years.
How can you possibly expect us to be able
to resolve the age care issues when you have cut pay equity
claims when your government has done so?
Oh, I think I'd highlight that.
Um, the age care sector is largely
privately delivered, publicly funded,
but privately delivered.
So they have employment relationships with their employers,
so it's a, um, there is still a pay equity claim process
that they can proceed with.
But the other component is that they,
the broadly the recognition is that we need a funding model
that allows the system to be sustainable.
And that's what the focus of this is.
If we have a sustainable funding model, which
encourages the businesses to grow and expand
and to meet the needs,
what I would say is I've traveled the country a lot over the
last year meeting of aged care providers.
Um, workforce has become less of the issue
that they are managing or challenged by.
Um, what they are challenged by is the funding model, um,
and the, the ability to deliver the service
that is needed within that funding model.
And that's what we're focused on.
We are aware that the pay equity, um, claim
that you mentioned could not happen for a number of years.
So in reality, those pay rates are not going to change.
We have a burned out workforce.
We don't have transparency
because of the private, uh,
public funding model that you've mentioned.
And if I look at the south island,
there are new contracts now that means
that if there are far fewer providers, uh, uh,
and it does mean also the relationships
with those people at home who are being fed
or being showered, very intimate kind of activities,
being given medication each week are
encountering different workers.
Are you satisfied that, uh, your approach to pay equity
and to the continuity of care is the right approach, given
that in reality those pay equity claims will not be able
to be taken for some years?
I'm satisfied that our program work, which is
to improve the funding model
and the contracting environment to ensure
that the system is adequately funded,
is the right work program
Work. And, and final
question on this one. Thank you, minister.
Um, many of those aged care workers are
using their own vehicles.
Um, they're having to travel sometimes on directions given
by people in different cities
who do not understand distances their time for
with their clients, and then they are effectively paying
their own vehicle costs, uh,
which they're not getting reimbursed for.
And the superior report pointed that out.
What have you done to ameliorate that?
Well, there has been, as we've said,
there has been funding uplifts into the aged care sector,
and that's the, the, the delivery of those services.
But I'm not defending the system that you're saying
that this is, there is real inefficiencies about 20% of the,
um, in-home community care budget is spent on travel.
Um, so that, you know, that that is the,
the challenge we've got there is a lot more efficiencies.
There's a lot more opportunity to use innovation
and, um, you know, to create those efficiencies around
how we use the workforce.
Um, and this is why the, the review is underway is to ensure
that we have a fit for purpose, um, contract model
and delivery of service moving forward.
Thank you. Just very, very final one.
If I may, our, our recommendations made it very clear
that if there is to be more investment into the sector,
there needs to be transparency so the money does get
to the workers, to the front line,
and to overcome some of those working conditions such
as the petrol and and so on and costs for workers.
Are you committing that we will have in any reforms,
transparency, that investment will go
to the frontline rather than, uh, go to profit?
The advisory group that we've established is, uh, is those
that are delivering the services,
and that is why we will be ensuring
that we get the right advice around what is the system
that we need to deliver all the expectations,
putting the consumer at the heart of those decisions as to
what is the best experience they can have.
And that is around the, that has been, you know, sort
of outlined in the terms of
reference for this working group. Thank you
Jenny, mark cro. Thank
you. Uh, thank you minister.
Um, palliative care is obviously a concern for many people
who wish to, whether it's die at home or
or access hospice service.
Um, in the far north currently, uh, there is, uh, no funding
or no specialist palliative care
and hospital in the far, um, what is your vision
for the palliative care palliative care sector?
Um, can you outline?
Well, as I only have the delegation
for aged care under my portfolio, so I can only speak
to the palliative care service.
Um, I think that is, you know,
I think it's referenced in your, your report as well.
I think that palliative care is part of the process, um,
around, you know, delivering quality of care, um, that is,
will be factored into the program.
And, um, the aged care sector has talked a lot about the
challenges around delivering those services
and that time limited funding, um, is not, you know,
appropriate around that support.
So I think that is, um, a big part of, um, the delivery
of an overall, um, you know, system design.
Um, so from within the aged care sector,
but I'm not sure if there is, um,
further comment from the Health New Zealand
around age of care.
We pick that up when Health New Zealand
and later that more appropriate then, um, thank you also,
uh, your, your minister, your advisory group, um,
which was, uh, mentioned earlier.
Um, can you give us a timeline
and any indication of who's going to be?
So the, uh, we'll go through a PH so, um, cabinet, um,
approval will hopefully be by next week,
and then we can make some announcements on that process.
Um, we had, um, we are very keen to ensure that, you know,
continuing on the, the work that the committee has done is
that we continue this bipartisan of appreciation of,
of the direction of travels.
So, um, we have, um, you know, we'll work through ways
that we can ensure to continue
to engage properly through its process.
Um, but we will definitely have announcements within the
next two weeks.
And then, um, with the view
to the group standing up by January next year,
Supplementary supplementary, um,
the announcements you're making over the next two weeks,
I understand there's a meeting with Minister tomorrow.
Are, are there going to be announcements
regarding retirement villages?
There are repayments in the next two weeks.
Um, I'm not sure of of that timeline. So
Yeah. Carlos,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you Minister.
My question is, you know, one
of the major issues in our community is
that some seniors have become increasing isolated,
especially after the COVID pandemic.
How do you identify these individuals
and what step did you take
to help reintegrate them back to the community?
I, I think that is, um, there's two components to that,
which, you know, I can put my
seniors hat on at the same time.
But, um, I think what we've seen
and what you will have seen through the select committee
processes that access of care or access to the system
and the complexity of the system, um,
has been challenging for people.
Um, one of the areas
that I see repeatedly is the enduring power of attorney.
Mm. Um, the process around under which, um, care can be
decisions can be made on behalf of persons
who are no longer capable.
That is one component.
There is another piece of work that through the office
for seniors that we drive around, um,
elder abuse initiatives
and those, um, you know, reaching those isolated communities
and there's a program work that sits under that process.
But I think in terms of the, the services
that we're talking about within health, this is
where the system design becomes so important.
The ability to access care the way care is, assessment
that way, care needs are assessed, um, how
that is worked forward
and the, um, opportunity for all of the workforce
to work at top of scope around, you know, where,
whether it's pharmacists, whether it's, um, uh, uh, gps,
um, nurse practitioners, how all
of those focuses can make it easier for people
to reach out and get help.
But there is a lot of, um, there's a, there's a mix
between health issues, um, mental health issues as well
as social issues that mix in there.
So that's why I'm trying to drive a program work
that's both looking at aged care,
but also through the better later Life Action plan
as Minister of Seniors is
how do we integrate those
solutions and work better together? Thank you,
Mr. But how can
we use those local group like committee care
to actually reach out
to those target population and, and work together?
There is a number of, you know, there is a number
of contracts that exist for age concern, for example.
Um, there is, um, community groups and, and,
and actually, you know, volunteer groups that do that work.
There is a referral process
and the, um, the, there is an elder abuse, um, hotline
because one of the things that we're saying is,
as you all have noticed, there's a lot of self neglect, um,
self deprivation where people are isolating
themselves from the system.
There is mechanisms under which you can report,
and that's, um, managed through the Office of Seniors.
Do, sorry, checking. I got one more.
Do, do you think that, um, those Friendship group or,
or maybe possible kind of a daycare center
for senior will be, uh, uh, one of the solution
or one of the direction we look?
Absolutely. Respite care is part
of the consideration in this,
and that would include day respite that would include, um,
and there's other programs work which don't sit within my
delegations around the care as strategy.
Um, but I believe that the delivery of respite care
and that stay respite
or support processes, um, is not only complimentary to the,
the issues that you're saying,
but it also provides a great deal of support for carers
as well to, uh, alleviate that.
So this is where, um, where I've said in the, in the terms
of references about developing a system
that's you can transition through
and gets the right care in the right place at the right time
is, is significantly important.
And the things that we need to allow people to stay at home
and age with Dignity, um,
should all be considered in that mix.
You, you, Dr. Ferl.
Thank you. Um, during the year under review,
the second amendment to Smoke-Free Environments
and Regulated Products Act was passed
with broad support across Parliament.
Uh, it included provisions for the restrictions on banning
of disposable vapes, penalties for greater penalties
for under eight sales
to minors restrictions on visibility and advertising.
How is the implementation of those changes going?
Um, it has been effective.
We've seen a massive increase in the, um, prosecution, um,
through, um, the infringement notice process
to fine the compliance, um, has been,
there's been, um, different areas where it's been,
we've seen good compliance.
There have been areas where we know there are individual
providers who have, um, been subject
to more than one infringement.
Fine. Um, that is, um, you know, going to be, continue
to be the priority for compliance as we move forward.
Um, I think the, um, it's still very early
because that those last changes only came
in in July this year.
So we're still very early in the process around assessing
that the impact.
Um, there have been encouraging signs, I think.
Um, are you able to update the committee either now
or in writing on the number of, um, uh, prosecutions?
I, I would have to do that in writing. Sorry, I
Don't have Thanks very much.
Um, what further amendments do you plan to the, um,
smoke-free environments and regulated products? So
As you'll be aware, there was a advisory group
that was established, their report has been published
with the ministry's commentary over the top of that, that's,
um, moving forward is that, you know,
what is the future state we need?
I think we can all agree that it's, we've got a real anomaly
around the fact that we have greater levels
of regulation on vapes than we do over tobacco.
So I think there's, um, a lot of work around how we do that.
Um, but yeah, so I'm, I'm working
through the advice from the group, um, to understand
what is the, the next steps, um, you know, what are,
what are the things that we need to do to a, you know,
ensure there's the appropriate level of regulatory control,
um, and how do we move forward to ensure
that we don't end up with the system where people go back
to smoking, et cetera. So
I have a few subs, if that's all right.
Mr. Chair, just to be clear, the way you would respond to
that is to, uh, increase the regulation of tobacco, not
to decrease the regulation of vapes, which we've all,
as a pa, pa parliament just agreed to increase.
No AB absolutely no, no.
That, that's, we are absolutely committed to ensuring
that vapes are not available for young people.
Yeah, no, but I, I think that we, we do need
to do something in the, in the tobacco space,
and that's what the advice that we've received
and we'll work through that advice.
We would be love to see that. If I may, Mr.
Chair, the advisory group, um, had a recommendation,
a moratorium on introducing new nicotine products
until there is clear independent evidence
that propose new products such
as oral nicotine pouches are safer than smoking
and effective in helping people who smoke to stop smoking.
Do you accept that recommendation? Yeah,
We, we are working through
and waiting for advice from, um, the, the ministry around.
You know, that, that safety criteria,
and I'm expecting a report, um, early next year, you know,
at, at, at sometime early next year, um, around that.
So that, that is the, the, the, the part that we want
to be sure of that we are some
Of the subs. Well, I'd
like to continue when,
Oh, I've got one from ka and
I'm actually happy for, um, to keep going.
I'll go one here and then I'll go to Cam and
They can put me back on list.
You just, You lose your, just forfeit, you forfeit
It can minister Ken, would
I be able to have more than one sub?
I can put you back on the list. Thank you.
Uh, can you commit, minister that if independent, um,
review of the evidence shows that there is no evidence
that are all nicotine pouches, uh, uh, safer than smoking
and effective in helping people quit,
that you will not legalize them in New Zealand?
I'm committing to smoke-free 2025, but
Smoke free has nothing to do with oral nicotine. So yeah,
I'm committing to achieving our smoke-free 2025 target
and that is the target that we, are we
Going go through this whole thing
all over again? Sorry guys.
I have Cameron Luxon. Question minister.
Have you, uh, been observing what's happening in
Australians, uh, the Australia Tobacco and vape market
and the perverse incentives that have come from poorly
designed and burdensome regulations?
Have you been paying attention to what's happening?
Yeah, very much so.
And it, it is a challenging environment from the taxpayer.
The recent, um, results of smoking from Australia
that I've been reported is
that they've seen an increase in smoking rates
and the influence of organized crime into that
space has been, um, significantly damaging to communities.
And so well s well, well-intentioned, uh,
burdensome regulations have actually had the perverse
outcome is what you've just told us.
Yeah. That, and that was the indications from the
increasing, um, levels of, um, smoking
that we've seen in Australia
And decreased emphasis, yeah, income.
Yeah.
Thank you. So does the minister believe
that our vaping regulations are sufficient?
I think that we, we have seen really positive indications.
Um, the latest ash survey has shown
that our youth vaping has come down.
Again, this is the third year in a row, which is
that year 10 11 survey that's been continuing.
Um, that, that is a really positive implication, um,
and that our smoking rate has, um, continued to go down.
I think there's a lot more that we can do.
Um, we still have to recognize that we, um,
have the third lowest smoking rate in the OECD.
So I think that's worth balancing in this conversation.
Um, and the vaping, um, um, challenges
that we had, I think we have made significant inroads,
but again, some of those legislative changes only
came in in July this year. So
One more, one more. Thank
you. And
so daily vaping has increased in all ethnic groups from
20, 20 15, 20 16, um, year through
to 23, 24 with daily things surpassing,
um, daily smoking that a few years ago.
Are we doing enough, um, for those larger groups like Maori
and Pacific adults
where the significant increase the happening
and that there is a massive disparities of like 20,
28% in Maori
And 21% in Pacific adults?
I think we need to do a lot more
to bring smoking rates down.
Um, Maori and Pacifica smoking rates, um, are
still not where we need them to be.
They're significantly higher than the
other population groups.
Um, we still see very high smoking rates in older people.
Um, so that is the, the target demographic.
We definitely need to keep vapes away from people,
but we cannot ignore
that vaping is less harmful than smoking cigarettes.
And I've never said
that it's not harmful and it's less harmful.
And therefore, in terms
of protecting health outcomes overall, I think
that's the focus we need to continue to have.
Go sir, Dr. Chong, and then I'll come back to you Dr. Ver
Thank Mr. Chair.
So minister, have you actually got time
to look into my member's bill on vaping about changing the
licensing system, instructing the favor
and also adding a, a health discri on the product.
Do you think those are the direction the
government actually looking at?
I, I think again, that, you know, that this working group
and the advice that, that I've received
and what is the direction
of travel will take into account all of those issues.
We still have to balance the fact that access to vapes
has contributed to our reduction in smoking rates.
So we need to ensure that access
to vapes is directed at those that we want
to ensure don't smoke, um, we do not want you to have access
to vapes, and we will continue to make
that the priority. Um,
Because one of my proposal is about changing the licensing
system from a lifetime licensing system
to become a renewable, uh,
renewable system licensing system.
Do you think this is more practical
or there's something you are interested
to looking into it and,
And as I said
through the recommendations we've got from the advisory
route, what that regulatory regime is?
Um, I think that what you have focused on is, again, this,
and it's, is what I touched on with Dr.
Verell before, is that we have a system where we have
massively focused on vape regulation
and we need to balance that with, um, how,
how do we manage tobacco products,
which are the most harmful in that regulatory framework.
So, um, what I'm keen to do is develop a system
that allows us, um, to continue
to meet our target for smoke-free.
Um, and how we deal that is, um, you know, that's
what the advice has been sought.
Mm-hmm. Yeah,
Minister the parliament has really struggled over
seven years to regulate vapes
and to address this nicotine addiction,
which is a health harm in children.
Why would you consider introducing a new form of nicotine
to New Zealand that will only create another pool
of addiction in young people?
I, I think that you,
you're conflating a couple of issues there.
One is that seven years, seven years that we had to get, um,
the vaping regulation.
We didn't have any regulation to start with
and we didn't do it very well at all
as we went through the process.
And this is the, the challenge we had.
We went from no regulation to reactive regulation around
how we were going to deal with this.
That is, you know, we, I think we have seen,
we have seen a significant shift in our outcomes, um,
and vaping rates.
So I think we have, um, headed in the right direction now.
We have seen that those youth vaping rates are coming down,
but if we look at from an evidence-based point of view,
there are two countries
that have lower smoking rates than us,
and they have other vaping product, other tobacco,
uh, nicotine products.
Um, we have used nicotine replacement treatments throughout
the process of reducing our smoking rates.
So therefore the process that we are looking at is,
as you've said, an evidence-based, um, system around
how do we ensure that we have a huge number between
that 55 and 64 age group
and you know, 45 to 64 age group
that are still long-term addicted smokers.
And so therefore having products available to them
as a pathway away from smoking
should be something we consider.
Well, if you are happy to have an evidence-based approach
as you imply notwithstanding the considerable misdirection
from that answer, why won't you accept the group's
recommendation that you'll only introduce oral nicotine
products If there's evidence
that they are safer than tobacco
and reduce smoking, why won't you accept,
accept an evidence-based re recommendation?
I, as I've said, I'm not,
I'm not saying I'm not accepting a re um, an it should be
Easy, very close.
Well, it, it is, but there is a number
of recommendations in that report
and we will work through as to
how we can operationalize those recommendations
and how it ultimately delivers. We accept
People say no to drugs every day, just say no to this.
Yeah. I've got to know that there's a saturation
of vape stores in lower, so economic communities,
for example, which has 19 vape stores
and they're small Northland town.
Do you think that Kaiko, he needs this many vape stores
and does the minister,
or can the minister help that, that community
and other communities like it
and councils to be able to control
how many vape stores are actually in the community?
Correct. Yeah. And, and that's, I think that's exactly
what, you know, we're talking about,
about the future regime is what is the regulatory system
to control the conduct of those tools.
At the moment, the only tool we have
is infringement notices.
So how do we deal with noncompliance stores?
How do we manage that process?
Um, you know, the reducing the displays, et cetera,
the increasing the penalties for non-compliance.
You know, they can be a deterrent,
but I don't think they're having the impact that we need
around how do we ensure that there is a, a system
that beyond just, you know, I'm, I'm now licensed,
how do we have a system that manages non-compliance
and deals with their ability to do business?
And therefore the same thing applies
because similarly, you have just as many, um, stores
that sell cigarettes.
So how do we manage a system that is, um, going to control
and, and provide the transparency we need?
Ultimately this is about reduction in harm
and we need to ensure that is the priority.
So I think keeping the kids out
and that's what we've seen in the results,
but the future state
and that's why I'm really keen to, um, take the time we need
to develop what that future state looks like
because we've got to think beyond, you know, getting
to our smoke free target.
What does that future state look like so
that we don't end up in a system where illicit tobacco
or other products end up, um, replacing things
and creating a new addiction stream.
So there, there is a lot of things to consider and the smoke
Get the dirty ashtray as as well.
Thank minister, thank you for making yourself available this
morning for answering questions.
Oh, we're actually just overtime
and we have minister waiting
to come in, so thank you very much.
Thanks for
my goodness.
Uh, are we able to get some more water please?
Some. Well, we've got one there.
You alright minister? Very good, thank you. Excellent.
Let's, okay on tour.
Welcome honorable minister for General Clark Bramley,
everyone else and gallery.
Fantastic. Have you all here, uh, we have you in here
for 45 minutes this morning.
I'll allow you to make some opening remarks
and then we'll open it up to
committee members for questions. Got it.
Good. Marina, uh, good morning everyone.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair and thanks all the members
of the Health Select committee
and all the work that, um, you do.
Look, I'm, um, straight into it, maybe assisted, uh,
by leadership and officials here today.
I'm sure I don't need to introduce them as they're probably,
um, uh, familiar faces to you now as, uh, health ministers
that have already been, um, before me
and associate health ministers as well.
I do want to, um, take this opportunity though
to think officials
and actually all those who are at the front line, um,
working hard for better mental health, um, in New Zealand.
Looking back, uh, at what we've achieved over the last year.
In preparation for this, um, very short introduction, uh,
I was, uh, impressed by the amount of work the government's,
uh, mental health program.
Three key deliverable actions, faster access to support
more frontline workers and a better crisis response.
Uh, we've increased the ringfence for mental health
and addiction, $2.4 billion when we came into office.
Now 2.8, uh, announced $28 million
for rolling out co response mental health teams.
Further $61 million recently for bolstering crisis response.
That will be more frontline workers in our crisis assessment
and treatment teams, as well
as more peer led acute alternatives for inpatient
services as well.
Uh, a $48 million refresh of the first ever mental health
and addiction workforce plan.
This country seen delivering outstanding results
with some mental health, uh, professions.
The vacancy rates in health New Zealand dropping
by 65% since coming into office.
The meth action plan, $30 million
grounded in feedback from the frontline,
how we'll reduce demand for meth
and support those who reach out in the time of need
through, uh, addiction.
We've got the FASD action plan six
and a half million dollars funded out
of the increase in the alcohol levy first government in 15
years to increase the alcohol levy.
And we've funded, uh, uh, fee
to our alcohol spectrum disorder program.
Um, out of that as well, uh,
would refresh the next five years
of the suicide prevention action plan, an extra $16 million,
uh, on top of the existing 2021 new health led
actions in that plan.
And 13 new cross-agency actions, uh, as well.
Uh, something I'm quite proud of is the refresh
of the eating disorder, uh, strategy.
That's something I heard loud
and clear when we're in opposition.
Our first refresh in 16 years, a 20% increased funding for
that vital support.
Um, as well the police mental health change program.
Now people taken by police into eds are guaranteed
to be handed over in one hour if they're assessed
in custody suites.
They're taken to mental health facilities within 30 minutes.
And the advice I've received lately has seen a significant
drop in mental health patients now being
held in custody suites.
And I think we can all agree, uh,
that it's the right way forward.
And just the final thing I'd say in closing, uh, Mr.
Chair, when we look at the annual health survey
around unmet need, a third
of young people under 15 report their unmet need not
'cause of lack of access to service.
'cause they don't know where to go a quarter of adults.
So that's why we've announced
and funded New Zealand's first AI assisted navigation tool
for mental health that will support those, uh,
to get timely access to care as soon
as possible for them as well.
Over to you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Minister Primary, Ingrid, Larry,
Uh, thank you Minister. You've
made quite a few big claims in there,
including talking about the RINGFENCE
and 61.6 million extra money.
Um, can you show me a budget line
where the mental health $2.7 billion ringfence
sits in the health budget?
Yeah, sure. So where is that line?
Because I've asked repeatedly in in, uh, os I've also asked
for the activities that form it
and your office has not been able to give them to me
because in fact, isn't it true that the mental health, uh,
budget sits alongside health budget
and so is included in the overall budget?
Well, it's included Invo Health, you're right,
I have the delegation of New Zealand's first mental health
minister for the Mental Health and Addiction Ringfence fund.
And let's be very clear, taking it from 2.4 to 2.8 billion,
uh, is not a ceiling either.
It's actually a minimum.
And the advice I've received recently in the last financial
year actually, uh, spent more than the ringfence.
So, um, if you've added around $700 million,
but we don't know what's actually in the ringfence
and we've ascertained that the $61.6 million
that you've talked about as being additional was
already in the ringfence.
How can we be sure we're getting
value for money when it comes to
Outcomes? Oh, look, I'm more than happy
with your follow up written
questions to ensure that you, uh, get that information.
Minister, I've been writing those questions
and in fact, in one of the, um,
official Information Act responses you have said
that work identifying the ring fence has stopped
because the role that was doing that was disestablished.
So, um, are you saying now that you will be able
to provide a list of activities that are covered? Yeah,
Mental health, health and addiction ringfence, uh,
is something that's been longstanding in New Zealand, uh,
and I have the real privilege of managing
that under my new delegation.
Thank you. I look forward to
saying that question. Thank you
Mr. Campbell.
Campbell. Thank, thank you minister.
Um, and I appreciate your line.
The number, number of actions already.
Something you haven't talked about, um,
is increasing the mental health workforce.
What have you been doing in that space?
Yeah, well, the auditor in general has been, uh, critical
of previous governments about not having a standalone mental
health and addiction workforce plan.
We published that in our first year.
Uh, I decided to take the opportunity in our second year
to refresh that, to look at the opportunities.
Uh, it's a $48 million plan.
$6 million of that was, uh, around, uh,
prioritizing addictions workforce quite often, uh,
an undervalued and, uh, under profiled workforce
and a valuable workforce In New Zealand, it's one
that is very different in it's training pipeline.
It's more about micro-credentialing. Uh, apprenticeships.
Earners, you learn placements.
So that's $6 million I've been advised will create an extra
50, uh, alcohol and drug practitioners, um, a year.
Uh, and that's 50 every year for three years.
That's a real legacy project.
And you think of some of the issues that we're responding to
around meth, that's a real game changer.
If you look at our commitment to doubling the number of, uh,
clinical internships for clinical psychology,
this year we had to meet a target of 60.
I'm happy to announce we've actually exceeded that.
And this year we'll be delivering 24 clinical, uh, sorry,
74 clinical internship places.
When you look at our commitment for psychiatry, uh,
to grow from, uh, 33 to 54, uh,
we are well on track for delivering that as well.
So it shows if you've got a clear plan, uh,
and measurable results, that's
how we'll deliver a better workforce.
The final point, I'll leave with you,
since coming into office,
there is 10% more frontline workers and mental health
and addiction, uh, today than when we came into office.
Yes, thank you. Um, and supplementary Mr.
Jets, um, what,
what have you done about maybe changing the scope
of some mental health practitioners?
Yeah, what we've done is we've listened to the frontline.
Uh, what we do know of you are looking at psychology.
We have hundreds of psychology, uh,
psychology undergrad students
who when they don't get those limited
clinical internship places,
the data shows they disappear from the field.
Uh, I've been very clear about creating new registrations.
Happy to announce the clinical, uh,
psychology assistant role, uh, has been signed off
by the psychology board.
They will hit campuses next year
and enter the workforce in 2027.
We'll be looking to scale that up to a hundred, uh,
every year to enter the workforce.
So I think that'll be a game changer.
Excellent. Thank you. Okay, we've got sub
strong Ingrid and Kahu. Ingrid.
Thank you Minister. Aren't you gaming the numbers a bit
when it comes to your claims about psychology?
Because you've doubled, you say you've doubled the number
of clinical psychology internships. No, we
Haven't Doubled. But you are referring
only to centrally funded internships
rising from 46.
The total number of clinical psychology interns trained
across six accredited programs is more than that.
So in fact, it's been higher than 40 years
before you actually took office.
No. Why are you,
why are you sort of cherry picking the numbers?
We've been through this before.
You keep going. I know, I know.
That's why I've got, got surprise to year on.
You still haven't caught up.
We are talking about Health New Zealand funded clinical
internship, places for clinical
Psychology. So what about those in each? If
You, lemme finish and I'll give you the answer.
In 2020, uh, four, uh, there was, uh, uh,
uh, 40, sorry.
In 2023 there was 40.
We made the commitment to double that to 80.
Uh, like I say, we are on track.
Not only have we worked with Health New Zealand,
but my colleague Penny Simmons has worked
with the universities to open up that funnel as well.
And, uh, this year we were to meet the target of 60
and we have exceeded that to 74.
So we're well on the way for meeting that
of Dublin Health New Zealand
funded clinical internship places.
Thank you. And that, thank you for clarifying that.
That is Health New Zealand only
and not relating to other clinics.
Psychology places Yes.
Education corrections. Exactly.
And the other departments be responsible for this.
So, um, my, my second question is just
around the assistant psychologists
where you have had a fifth of your workforce,
about 800 psychologists write to you with concerns
to say they don't feel comfortable supervising these people
because they, they do not have, uh, the clinical experience
and also the workforce is burned out.
What are the pathways going to be
for these people who've got a year postgraduate training?
Uh, where, where are you going to place them
and why are you calling them?
Why have they got psychology in the,
in the name when in fact they are closer to talk therapists
or counselors in their training?
So you raised that a number of clinical psychologists, um,
did oppose this in their submissions
to the psychology board.
I just rest assured to the committee that number equated
to less than 8% of registered psychologists.
I'd just like you to reflect on the submissions
you hear in the committee.
Uh, 8% opposing, I would say is probably pretty
Good. Eight. Eight have signed the letter.
So, uh, what we have heard is that resoundingly, uh,
the psychology profession supports this.
That's why the psychology board has signed it off.
That's why psychology departments at, uh, uc
and a UT have written the curriculum.
That's why I won't announce today.
There'll be several other universities
who will be announcing this program as well.
Uh, this will be a game changer.
We've listened to the front line.
We are delivering a new registration,
and I just put it to you, you can listen to the one
or two, uh, psychologists who might like this.
I'll listen to the hundreds if not thousands of Kiwis
who can't get timely access to care
because we've got too many workforce vacancies.
And that's who I'm listening to.
Kahoo thank you. And the FASD,
the fetal alcohol spectrum disorder plan, 25
to 28 it, Alex, that's 1.35 million to workforce.
Point of water chair. Point of water.
Dr. Campbell, um, we've kind of jumped topics here.
This is not really following on from,
I'm talking about workforce specifically.
Yeah, workforce. So there's 1.35 million
Workforce for FASD.
Mm-hmm.
Which is not psychology.
That's okay. We can, I can leave it and jump into it.
We can jump into it later. This
Must Just happen areas.
Oh, I just finish my last point on this.
Yeah, I'll, I'll thank you.
I'll come back to you, Ingrid, but I'll let Kahu do this.
Thank you. Because it is related to workforce,
which is what the primary world,
So how will the government ensure
that the workforce trained is a representative
of the population that they will be serving?
So recognizing that Maori are disproportionately exposed
to risk factors for FASD.
Yeah. Look, um, I I just want to acknowledge, uh,
our current NGO
and community providers who are working in that space, um,
quite an area that is at time has not received the
prioritization that it should.
Uh, and what we do know with the peer support,
lived experience workforce,
especially in FASD, is very powerful.
Mm-hmm. I, I, I've met with these, uh,
workers at the moment, uh, who have experienced the impact
of FASD either on themselves or or their family members.
And so that's why the prioritization
of this funding is actually to grow that peer support,
lived experience workforce.
Uh, it's very important since coming to office,
the peer support lived experience workforce has grown 91%.
That's what staggering not only in FASD,
but we've also funded new peer support, uh, workers
to roll out in our eating disorder services, uh,
our emergency department services crisis cafes as well.
And look, there, there is a role for the more, uh,
medicalized, um, professions who are working, uh,
with people impacted by FASD.
And we see with that plan a real opportunity
to invest in their upskilling the workforce development.
Quite often they will go through their medical training
and not have any training around working
with people with FASD.
And, and that's where we'll look to prioritize that as well.
Thank you. Just Back on the psychologist, I mean,
I think this goes to, um, what appears to be a lack
of monitoring and evaluation in the system
of whether it's working.
So psychologists are telling me for example, that people
with a CC sensitive claims are going
to talk therapy when in fact they may need psychology
services for trauma.
It's a bit like going to a knee doctor with a head injury.
Your focus on these, um,
psychology assistance while well intentioned, are not going
to help that higher end of need, which is the acute end,
which is where we are seeing all the need.
Wouldn't you be better off focusing on increasing the
internship hubs and scaling those so
that we can get more placements for our psychology students
and therefore grow the psychology workforce,
not the assistants who have a very different role
and cannot work at that acuity.
Sorry, that felt I was biting down the toilet zone.
We just spent the last few minutes talking about doubling
the amount of clinical internships for psychology,
which I think answers your question.
It's not a one or the other. It's actually both.
Uh, this government's doing a lot
of things at the same time.
So not only are we doubling the number
of clinical internships in, uh, clinical psychology, uh,
we're actually rolling out a new registration.
And actually by having the clinical, uh,
the assistant psychologists, they'll be able
to support the clinical psychologists to work at the top
of their scope while actually assistant psychologists will
work in a very clear scope about low intensity patients.
So when you actually look, uh, at the examples
around the world, whether it be the uk, uh, yeah,
there might have been a bit of pushback with the new, uh,
assisted psychologist, um, was proposed there.
Ask any clinical, uh,
psychologist now in the uk they wouldn't do without their
psychology assistance and their teams.
And that's what we're doing, right?
We're growing capacity in both work streams.
That is the ability of having a mental health minister
who has the time.
Now to get into the detail of this,
if you look at the workforce plan, we've stepped
through every profession
and opened up the training pipeline.
All the constraints are different
and I'm quite proud of what we've achieved,
Noting that the clinical psychology roles in the UK are
quite different from those proposed in New Zealand.
Also on workforce senior minister you mentioned
the co response teams.
Um, the treasury wrote
and said that you need $15 million
to make those rollout effectively
and that needs to come from the police
budget. Have you got that money?
Look, we are still, uh, about to announce, uh, the first,
uh, four sites for the rollout
of 10 mental health response teams.
Really excited about that.
And I want to thank police for prioritizing
Program. And have they given
you the $15
or have you got the $15 that Nicola Willis said or that
and directed police to give to you?
And that police have made very clear from their letter
that they need an order for this to, uh,
keep the frontline safe for mental health workers. Well,
I'll, I'll let Mark Mitchell,
the police minister talk about his budget.
But I just point to you, we are soon to, uh,
announce the first sites and we're really excited about the
joint work between police and health.
Not only enrolling out the mental health, uh,
co response teams, but in the police change program.
Well, this is your area of responsibility
that your work is saying Amish
Campbell supplementary.
Excellent. Thank, thank you. Thank you minister.
Um, and you touched on it briefly, um,
with the Greens members question.
Um, with the peer peer support, um,
workforce growing 91%, I mean you talked about, um,
peer support and the ED department.
How's the rollout going for for that?
Yeah, you're right. We've seen, uh, the number
of peer support roles grow by 91%.
Um, that's partly to do with, uh,
a million dollar fund we set up so people can access
that level four peer support, uh, training as well.
But to be fair, um, a lot of the support for
that program is coming from the NGO
and community groups, um, themselves.
And I want to thank for that.
Uh, look, I was at the launch of the Wellington peers
in ED recently.
I met one of the peer support lived experience workers.
Uh, she was very candid.
Um, she said it was a very surreal day for her
because a few years earlier she was the one coming into
Wellington Ed in crisis.
Now that she is in recovery
and gone through formal training,
it's quite a specialized peer role
to work in a busy environment like emergency departments.
She is now supporting those coming in a time of crisis.
I think that's quite powerful
and the feedback I get is
that not only are they supporting people better when they
come into ed, but the feedback from existing emergency
department staff are saying the value they see in
these new roles as well.
And when you think about people coming in, in a time
of vulnerability, having someone who can sit
and talk to them who's been there
before, not tell them what to do
but share their story, uh, is very powerful.
And I'm a big backer of peer support
and it's great to see it
getting traction all around the country.
And that's not to do with me, that's to do
with the peer support movement
and I'm just happy to enable them.
Supplementary, it's supplementary.
Um, minister you've mentioned the ED department at
Wellington Hospital, which, um, has got one of the,
is at the lower end of success in the targets of wait times.
I think it's around 35%, noting
that some of them are, are better.
Fama Tutu have offered a, uh, a support that would free up
people in the ED departments
and it costs one, uh, full one week in tutu
for anxiety and depression in Wellington,
the equivalent of one night in hospital.
Why didn't you fund them?
Why haven't you stepped in to support and fund them?
Why didn't you fund Ger house?
Why are you saying these decisions are operational when in
fact they would resolve a lot
of your frontline problems when it comes
to providing support for anxiety, depression
and freeing up hospital beds?
Yeah, well, um, you, you started with, um,
the Wellington Emergency Department and,
and you're right, their performance, uh,
within the government's targets around faster access within
emergency departments is quite frankly, um, not good enough.
Um, I would say though, when I set that target,
I was advised by officials,
people coming in may be substance related.
Acute presentations can take longer
because of course they need
to come down from potentially the drugs they have used.
Um, but I just point out to those targets.
Now, uh, under the health minister, Simeon Brown, we've gone
through regionalization
and now going back to decision making, close
to the front line, those targets I can report on the 20
health districts each level of performance.
That's a game changer because executive regional directors
and, and Dale will speak to that are having
to put action plans together,
how they drive up performance against the targets.
We are meeting, uh, the target nationally
for primary mental health
and addiction access and specialist.
But I've always said that's not gonna be good enough
because some of the regions are not meeting that.
So the goal is now is to go in
and lift up performance across the country
and that'll be a game changer for the postcode lottery.
Um, we have you quite rightly point out, uh,
there is a number of innovative and good mental health
and addiction services across the country.
Some are funded by the government,
some are funded by private funding.
Uh, some are philanthropic and, and charity funded.
That that is the makeup of the mixed, uh, economy of care.
We have in New Zealand, uh,
quite often services reach out about funding.
Uh, health New Zealand is an independent crown entity.
I can't in intervene in that funding decision.
So those decisions go, uh,
to Health New Zealand to make the decision.
I would point out for the Wellington Depression Center,
though, uh, health New Zealand's decision on, um,
not funding that service is the same today
as it was under the last government. So nothing's changed.
Um, minister, you've talked about these ED wait times
as if they're health outcome targets,
but as a policy resident you would accept
that those are not health outcomes.
Those are useful indicators to try
and get people through the system.
But in terms of the $700 million in the ringfence,
what can you show has got better given that uh,
wait times is not a health outcome, that is an enabler.
Can you point to, to one thing that is not given point?
I thought the primary question is on workforce.
I think we got a bit too far now.
Primary question is on workforce
Speaking to the point of order, the minister
of himself talked about,
we've been having a discussion about ED and wait times.
The minister is referred to ED wait Times as a health
target, which I accept,
but I am, um, asking the minister if he also accepts
that it is not a health outcome.
And what I would like to know from the minister is
what health outcomes can he show have improved under his
watch with the 700 million increase? I'm happy to
Answer it. It's not the
Thank you minister Won to the point,
but I just want, thank you.
I'm sure the minister won't, um,
mind answering the question, but I just want to, uh, raise
that yesterday going, my question must be rejected
by you guys when the committee was stray this
far, it was hauled up on.
So I think Carlos Chung's point of order is thank
You for your opinion on Chong's point of order.
Thank you for offering. And, and yes, and,
and the minister has offered to, uh, to answer it and,
and in his previous answer, he did move into this area.
So yeah, no, it's no problem. He let it go.
Look. Um, when you think about the mental health
and addiction targets, we set five targets, three of them
around Access, one aware around workforce, the other
around prevention, early intervention, quite frankly,
where I started
to formulate those mental health addiction targets was my
time in opposition, getting out, listening
to people at the front line, uh, people trying
to access services.
People told me, uh, in a time of need, they needed,
they found a fragmented system
and it took too long to be seen.
I took, uh, advice from officials.
What was the impact of, um, being stuck on waiting lists.
And I think you would agree, uh, it's a real red flag
to be stuck on a wait list
with a mental health and addiction issue.
Uh, it deteriorates.
And so that is why, um, three
of the five targets are focused on access.
If we want to know around the effectiveness of our services,
I would just point to in addictions, we have an outcome, uh,
monitoring, uh, evaluation that, uh, people fill out as well
as services called a om Alcohol
and drug Outcome monitoring
for young people in mental health services.
It's called ska. And for adults it's called Enos.
That that is more a clinical tool.
Uh, but that actually measures the outcome of, uh,
that people get engaging in those services.
Last up, and then we're gonna move on
To really appreciate primary answering that Minister.
I think the point is that over the last couple of days,
we have been asking scrutiny questions
of the health Quality Safety Commission of the ministry.
Um, and nobody seems
to be monitoring mental health outcomes.
Your own targets are around access, which is important.
How is your system measuring outcomes so that we know,
for example, that like the acc, um,
at the ACC point of Dr.
Chong, sorry, that we're not sending, sorry, ing dr
for a head injury. We've got a
Point of order.
We are very clear that we can't just do a supplementary
like this on kind of an open field.
So, but this supplementary is not really
related to the primary questions.
Speak. Speaking to the point of order, point of order, uh,
the, the minister has helpfully answered the question
and we're interrogating outcomes.
The point is trying to ask the minister,
given we have not been able to get any agency
to say who's measuring health, mental health outcomes,
where we find that information, given
that his targets don't relate to that.
Speaking to father one to do with mental health
and addiction to addiction services.
But what about other mental health outcomes
Speaking The point of board,
or are you asking the minister a question
Right now? Well, that sounds
like a question.
Can, can I speak to the point
Board? I'm sure the minister behave to
Answer. I'm gonna
Roll. I could, I could go
through the mental health system 1 0 1.
It starts off, we've got an organization called Health
New Zealand, and they go out
and they contract service providers.
Part of that contract, uh, has outcome monitoring
that is built into the contracts about whether, uh,
services are, uh, are re-contracted.
And also we have a regulator
and a monitor that's called the Ministry of Health.
They monitor Health New Zealand around outcomes,
But they told us, And obviously, uh, I take an active
ary from the Health New Zealand
and the Ministry of Health,
how those contracts are going as well.
We have measurement scales in New Zealand,
so I'm not sure really it's a, um, conspiracy.
It might be just a induction 1 0 1.
Thank you, minister. Look, um,
we are drifting a long way on this
Move.
Georgia, could we please hit my, my colleague
Supplementary? You were starting your
supplementary.
I said it was the last one. No problem.
And I wanted to move on. I wanted to move on
to the next primary people have
primaries, including yourself.
Gonna go to,
Uh, thank you.
Um, minister, the alcohol levy was set at an annual value
of 16 6 million in July, 2025.
Despite the recommendation on the independent review
of alcohol levy stage two reporting an increase
to 37.3 million, will the annual VA value
of the alcohol levy be increased in July, 2026
to the value recommended in that independent review?
If not, what is the justification
for keeping the alcohol levy set
below this recommended value?
When the cost of FASD
and alcohol harm is more broadly, more broadly,
grossly exceeds that value coming to
around 9 billion a year?
Yeah. And is there negligible impact on the
cost of alcohol?
Yeah, look, I I, I think that's a fair question.
Um, when you look at the Allen
and Clark recommendations, which is what you're referring
to, um, we had an alcohol leader said about 11
and a half million, been sitting there for about 15 years.
We came into government
and increased that to about, I think 16
and a half, approximately about a five
and a half million, um, increase as part of the Allen
and Clark, uh, review.
Not only what did it propose an increase,
but it also, uh, proposed a range of other, um, actions
around a new investment framework, uh,
and looking at the, the effectiveness of
what the alcohol levy was funding as well.
Mm. So cabinet made the decision, uh,
that we would increase it, uh, to 16 and a half million
and also go through, uh, implementing
that new investment framework, which we have now done,
and the other actions within that.
Uh, look, I, I don't want to get a head of cabinet
for the next review of the alcohol levy
because it is a cabinet decision.
Um, but I, I can say today, uh, as a minister, I'm, I'm,
I'm open to that and
that's the process we will step through.
Thank you. I've got a couple of supplementaries
around the FASD action plan.
So FASD is not equitably dis distributed in our,
as we've talked about, um, earlier.
How will the government ensure the equitable access
to actions included in the, in the FAC action plan
for those experiencing the highest rates?
Could you say that? How is it equitable
Access e equitable access to the distribution of, um,
of access to, to support Exactly. Yeah,
To support Resources. Well,
Actually one key part of the FASD action plan is the
rollout of better assessment tools.
Uh, and that will actually help, um,
skill up our existing professions who work with people
with FASD, but actually through the, uh, new assessment
and the referral pathways into support
that will allow people to be guided
and to support that hasn't been there before.
There's also further investment into community services.
Uh, we talked about the peer supports, lived experience,
workforce growing that as well.
And something that we heard loud
and clear from the FASD community was the support for whanau
and family as well, who,
who were supporting their own family members with FASD.
And that's a key part of the action plan as well.
Thank you. Uh, so with that action plan,
it talks about a joint up multi-agency approach.
So what mechanisms are in place to prevent siloed funding
and ensure that coordination across health, education,
justice, and the social services Yeah.
Which are all really impact,
especially our kids who have Yeah.
FASD and their long-term outcomes.
Yeah, and I, I think that's well said.
And, um, it was acknowledged at, in, in the action plan,
I suppose for this government.
We would call it a social investment approach.
We know actually it's not just the responsibility of health.
Uh, one of those, uh, departments you,
you'd rightly picked out was education.
Uh, and we do know through taking a life course approach.
So the, the report we released alongside the action plan,
uh, framed up our approach to FASD,
taking a life course approach, uh, maybe
what might be needed in the first 10 years of
that person's life, potentially different
than the next 10 years.
And why we say that is when we look at the outcomes from
young people with FASD in, um,
education settings is quite poor.
And it poses the question, uh,
what can we do better in the educational setting
to support those with FASD?
And that was a key plank
of the action plan as well. Primary?
Yeah, absolutely. Primary. Yep. Two questions, Chris.
No, we're not on to you.
You're out of subs or you have
another, I think there's one more.
Is that right? Yeah. Thank you.
Uh, so just looking at the New Zealand Health Survey,
excuse me, alcohol results that show
that the government is not on track
to meet its target on reducing hazardous drinking at the
population level, especially with the 15
to 24-year-old age group,
that hazardous drinking rate has increased
to 27% over the previously.
Yeah. Which is a significant reversal.
Um, and the population of that 15 plus group hasn't changed.
So you spoke, uh, in your, um, preamble
around the alcohol plan of the,
the alcohol harm reduction plan.
So what national actions
or policy is the government developing, which has evidence
of the effectiveness in reducing hazardous drinking,
particularly at that population level with our young people?
Yeah. And I mean, first
to acknowledge there is quite a shifting in, um,
drinking habits for our young people.
Uh, and the data does show they are drinking less. Mm-hmm.
Uh, we also see that, um, customers are asking for low
or zero alcohol drinks as well.
Uh, and we are supporting that.
Um, education is, is a key part of that,
and that's what we support as well.
Um, slightly, um, uh, varying out of my delegation.
Um, if you look at the sale
and supply of Liquor Act with Nicole McKee mm-hmm.
Really tightening up, uh, some of the issues around, uh,
young people ordering alcohol with some of the providers now
that deliver it to home as well.
There's some real opportunities within that.
But I would just put to you, we are seeing quite an effect
of education on our young people
who are making very different choices
than may be previous generations.
Uh, and that is presenting in the data as well.
So we want to support that.
Thanks. We've got sum with time. Yeah. Excellent.
Thank you, minister. Um, and you might have actually touched
a bit on this in in your last, last answer, um,
but just focus on FASD.
Um, we talked about an increase in, uh, support, um,
also increasing assessment
because of course it is a challenge and it is a spectrum.
Um, what about prevention specifically in the fetal alcohol
spectrum of water action plan?
Yeah, and there is quite an existing campaign, uh, around,
um, alcohol-free pregnancies.
Uh, we see that as a real opportunity to focus on,
we know it's, uh, a program that is already evidence-based
and delivering results.
So we want to support that program by enabling it
with more resources, um, to grow, to get the word out there
around alcohol-free pregnancies.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you. Very primary. Two
Quick questions, minister.
Thank you. Sure. Um, earlier this year,
you gave an 8% uplift
to the Health New Zealand workforce under 3%,
one to the funded sector.
Uh, and with a lot of interrogation, we weren't able to see
what the evidence base was for the disparity.
Uh, so looking at the ringfence, uh, are you prepared
to offer pay parity so
that people doing the same jobs within the system can
get the same amount of work?
And how do you think you're gonna be able to deliver given
that pay equity claims have been cut?
That's the first question. My second question is,
even though we don't really know what's in the ring fence,
'cause there is no line item, uh, it's more of a,
an accounting or political construct, nevertheless, uh,
do you think there's enough money in it for you
to deliver on your mental health targets and plan?
Well, um, with respect?
I think we saw from your government,
it's not just all about announcements of money
or else you would've shifted the dial.
Remember the 1.9 um, billion? Yes, of course. A budget. So
Isn't to the job minister.
Uh, yes. It, it, it is important.
Um, funding, uh, look, it, let's be real, uh,
times are tight for this country,
but I'm actually quite proud, uh,
every budget we've increased, uh, the mental health
and addiction ring fence funding by, uh, around 200 million.
So gone from 2.4, uh, to 2.8 billion as,
as well as new funding,
new money has been announced in budgets
as well. That is so,
Doesn't get paid comparison.
That's rude. That, that, that is work in progress.
Uh, and as the minister, I will work hard to ensure, uh,
that we, um, uh, get, uh, enough resource
to support better mental health in New Zealand,
but it's also about ensuring, uh,
that we get results out of that money as well.
And we're not measuring them.
I would, I would just point to you around, uh,
not only the access targets,
but actually the numbers of people being seen
because of, uh, the focus ensuring people get primary
access within one week
and specialists within three weeks as well.
So look, there's an absolute focus on this, ensuring
that we get real results about the money
that we have put in.
Yes, the government does support pay equity and pay parity,
and we will work through that,
through the contracting process
with our NGO and community groups.
I'd just like to point out for them, we heard loud
and clear that for the last few years they were getting very
frustrated, uh, about being put on singular
singular year contracts.
Uh, I've moved on that, uh, from next year.
The advice I've got is we will shift from around 20%
of the funded sector, uh, on multi-year contracts to
around 95%.
That is a significant shift,
and that will actually reduce administrative costs
for those organizations.
Do you talk about 82% in your referral rate
as a success target, but do you accept that
that doesn't capture all the numbers
because, uh, people in that 82%, many
of them are not even getting referred.
So how can you refer to 82% in your,
in your targets when you're not capturing the population
that need the mental health outcomes?
Well, I, I would just ask you respectfully
to reflect on what you've just said.
Uh, the target is 82%
of people are seen in their first appointment, uh, within,
uh, uh, three weeks for specialist.
Uh, the data's tracking up more to the middle eighties
for one week for primary, uh,
that is showing they are getting timely access to support
The ones that are actually able to
Get referred come through me.
Carlos?
Yes. Uh, thank you, minister.
I mean, there's a lot of reporting of noises about I'm Hope
and Friday in the last two days,
and I saw one of your comments.
You said some people may not understand the contract.
What is it about, I think the general public now deserve to
a update or comment from you?
What actually the money spent on I am Hope
and, um, amplify Friday. What is it for
Documentary?
Yeah, look, it was part of, um, the coalition agreement
between, uh, national
and New Zealand first, uh, $24 million o over four years,
uh, to deliver vital support to 15,000, uh, young people.
The data shows, um, gum Boot Friday is seeing people, uh,
sometimes within a 48 hour window
and generally within three to four days as well.
Uh, it also is a platform that has now scaled up, uh, to
around, uh, 850 counselors.
That's about a third increase
since they've had that funding.
What's really interesting when you look at the, um,
procurement model and the funding contract,
and that's why it was so well received
by the recent report from the auditor general, is all
that money goes into fee
for service goes directly into clinical activity.
On average, about $150, um, a session.
None of that money is into spent on administration, uh, or,
or overheads as well.
So what we know is investing into that program,
they have universal coverage, uh,
across, uh, the whole country.
Um, and so I think, you know, writing a letter
to the auditor general with some opposition MP is, uh,
asking them to investigate with concerns
of financial management of I am Hope, I think is,
um, pretty disappointing.
Can, can I ask you as a, as a minister,
if you look back in the past 12 months, how are you good
to raise that performance?
Yeah, that's good question.
So we have very clear performance management contracts,
and not only that, as the Auditor General did report, uh,
we are getting regular updates of their activity, uh,
and they are well on track
to deliver the expectations to their contract. Thank
You. Jenny Supplementary.
Thank you.
Um, Mike King, um, stepped down from his leadership role
with I'm Hope in November.
What comment do you have to him as someone
who has campaigned
and championed mental health for our young people, um,
as part of his departure in the, in the program of work
that, um, the government has done alongside
with Mike? Comments, do you have for him?
Yeah, look, um, I, I've spoken to Mike.
Um, he is, like you say, stepping down from,
uh, a management role.
Uh, he, he's not leaving.
He just wants to get back to the front line as you'd expect.
Uh, Mike's a well respected advocate as we have many others.
You think of Sir John Kwin. Uh, think of Jazz Thornton.
And I want to thank all the advocates and,
and also the ones who necessarily don't get as much profile,
the ones on the frontline, um, every day who are,
are making a real difference.
And look, uh, the final point I'd leave you.
It's, uh, it's my personal view.
I'm in a privileged position.
I travel, uh,
the country talking mental health and addiction.
I think Kiwis would be largely surprised by the level
of support out there, I think at times,
because some people, uh,
only consume the mental health system
through the media reports,
which only prioritize potentially, uh,
when people haven't been able
to get the, the care they need.
But on average, uh,
I would say most people do get connected to timely support.
But not only that do, boy, do they get connected
to people on the front line who are passionate,
who know their stuff
and make a real difference
for Kiwis in a very vulnerable
time of their life. Maybe that's
Where the 1.9 million believe.
We've got a supplementary from Ingrid Larry.
Oh, uh, Mr. Chair. Actually, I'm really interested.
I would, uh, agree with the minister's, um, characterization
of our incredible workforce.
I am interested to know, given
that we're talking about funding and who's getting funding
and the fact that some agencies have fallen over
because they have not been able to get funding.
We have a reallocation of uncommitted funding in,
in the books, uh, $10.41 million
in 20 24, 25, 26 0.13 million in 20 25, 26.
Um, and I'm just really wanting to know what got cut
in order to now spread that to
AKA wellbeing campaign
Chair. No, I, I
would like to answer that
because the, the members just asked me a question about why
did we prioritize funding for in the Bay of Plenty.
I don't think she's gonna like to hear this.
When I came in to be mental health minister,
the officials warned me
that the last government had left a fiscal cliff
around the money program at Bay, plenty
and not fully funded it.
And I was to need to find funding to sustain that
or young people in the Bay
of Plenty would not get the service, uh,
that had been set up.
So that member needs to respond to that.
The second thing I'd say is coming into government,
we made it very clear our mandate was to get money
that was stuck in Wellington out to the front line.
And the reason I could prioritize that money was
because I found money in the mental health
and diction ringfence fund that was unallocated
and stuck in Wellington.
And you think of all the demand out there at the front line
and the last government was sitting on money unallocated.
Just shame on the
Mr. Chair, if I may.
He did ask me to respond.
And I think it's, it's fair to me to be able to respond,
to say the question. You may
Think that, but I'm saying we
members committee thank you for today.
You thank.